NOTE: This file is automatically generated by running make


[comment]: # (--------- 00_A_course_info.md ---------)
# Course Information
This is originally motivated by creating contents for the course 
_Fundamentals of Computing and Programming_ [(see here)](https://www.isibang.ac.in/~adean/infsys/database/Bmath/FCP.html) for the first term of 
the academic year 2022-2023.




[comment]: # (--------- 00_books.md ---------)
# Suggested texts to learn programming and the C language
This is a practical course. We learn only by doing!
However a good text is an asset especially when we 
wish to refer to how something works in C (syntax).

Use any textbook you wish. However as a very good
reference we can use the classic C book:  
_The C Programming Language_ by Kernighan and Ritchie, 2nd Edition.  
The book is widely available inlcuding [free online pdfs](https://www.google.com/search?q=kernighan+ritchie+online+pdf) and [recent reprints](https://www.flipkart.com/search?q=kernighan+ritchie). 

**Remember you learn more by doing than by reading.**




[comment]: # (--------- 00_motivation.md ---------)
# Motivation
## Objective
  This is motivation for students about why program. 
## One way to look at Programming in general
  * The idea is that we would like to codify an activity, write an algorithm. 
  * The algorithmic approach
    * Computers for Data Processing and Numerical Computation
    * Symbolic Computation

## Examples
  To seed that idea we take simple mathematical examples.
  * Understand what an algorithm is
  * Take a cery simple example found in find\_max.c
  * Write some common algorithms in as clear a way as possible eg GCD and LCM
  * See how we go from algorithm to code in these two C examples:
    * gcd.c 
    * lcm.c




[comment]: # (--------- 01_intro_crud_compile.md ---------)

# Computer Command Familiarity
It is important to be familiar with the basic commands of the 
computer system you are using in order to be able to 
learning programing by doing!
The text below assumes you are using a Linux system like Ubuntu.

## Simple Linux Commands
### Objective: Student to be able to do the following:
  * Basic linux commands echo, exit,
			   ls, pwd, mkdir, cd, 
                           cat, cp, mv, 
		           rm, rmdir
  * Make CRUD changes to files
  * Use an editor
  * For a C program COMPILE, EDIT, RUN
  * A bit of history

### Notes:
  * First class to be boring to those with programming experience already
  * Are the students able to 

## Commands to Create and Edit Files
### Objective: CRUD files 
  * Create: copy, rename files
  * Read:   cat files
  * Update: edit files, 
  * Delete: delete files
  * Windows editor to use C/C++ IDE pre insalled, or Notepad++)
  * Linux editor to use vi / vim or gedit or atom...
### Exercise:  
  * A bunch of programs we will refer to here are available on github
    * Go to https://github.com/rbadrinath/FCP
    * Now you can download a file like 3np1.c to your 
      local computer using the following procedure:
    * Click on the name of the file 3np1.c 
    * Now you right click on "Raw" (just above the first line of the program) 
      and then select the "Save as" menu item
      to save the file on your local computer.
    * _An alternate is to click the "Copy" icon (Two overlapping squares) and save to ( ie paste into) a local file using an editor like vim or gedit._
    * You will need to download files often so feel comfortable using this procedure
  * Take an existing file and copy it to create a new file.	cp f1 f2
    * Rename the file using mv   				mv f2 f3
    * View the contents of the file using cat.		cat f3
    * Edit the file using an editor.			gedit f3
    * Delete the file using rm				rm f3
  * Repeat this exercise - The teacher will repeatedly ask people to do things

## Compile and Execute Programs
### Objective: Compile and Execute Programs
  * Lets start by taking a 'largish' example. Sieve of eratosthenes.
  *  Notion of writing a program
  * Notion of compiling a program
  * Notion of execution
### Exercise: 
  *   Download sieve of eratosthenes.c, compile, execute
  *	Make small changes just to the output ie edit. 
        Again compile and execute.

## The Edit Compile Execute Loop
* Objective: Be comfortable making small changes to a program, recompile, etc
  * lets also use the opportunity to play with the program statements.

* EXERICISE: Can you download the same program and do what you saw in class?
  * eratosthenes.c
  * Can you do it for another program ?

* Exercise: download, compile and execute each of these:
  * fact.c
  * 3np1.c
  * stats.c

* Exercise: download, compile and execute:
  * hello\_world.c and hello\_world.h    : A program can be split over files.
  * simple\_timing.c and timeutil.c and timeutil.h

* End Class Exercise: 
  Can you download the following C program and compile it and
  make it run on your PC: https://www.sanfoundry.com/c-program-find-inverse-matrix/
  Now change it a little bit - perhaps change the printf statements a little.


(We will look deeper into what is a statement or expression and all that
later on... the next thing.)

* End of Class Check:
  * ANSWER THE FOLLOWING:
    * How to / What is the command on this computer to compile a program?
    * How to / Why do you need to recompile when you edit a program?
    * Try objdump --disassemble on some program a.out to see what 
		the final executable looks like.
	
# History:  
  Now to some historical perspective of computing
  * What lead to the invention of the computer?
  * The stored program model of computation
  * What problems were solved by early computers?
  * Where did the personal computer come in?
  * What enabled the growth of computers ?
  * The early days of programming.
  * The growth of programming languages as the interface to computation.
  * Imperative programming languages and the rest.
  * Other branches of computer science
    * Formal Languages and Automata
    * Computer Arch and operating systems
    * Data structures and Algorithms
    * Discrete mathematics - combinatorics and graph theory
  The notion of algorithms : What it means to computer programming
    * all of programming is a certian way to implement algorithms

* END OF CLASS CHECK:
  * How is a computer different from a calculator
  * What do you think you will learn in this class




[comment]: # (--------- 02_expr_stmt_var.md ---------)



# Expressions, Statements and Blocks in C
## Objective: 
  * Notion of expressions, statements, blocks
      ( Lets try to look at programs and what its elements are. )
  * Notion of constants and opetators
  * Write a program independently
  * Notion of a variable
  * Notion of value vs address

## Expressions and Values
  * A program as  a collection of expressions.
  * Expressions are used mainly to get values.
  * They can be arithmetic, logical, etc.
  * See expr.c
  * Here are many expressions
~~~text
5+3 is an expression.  
5        (note that expressions dont need to have operators)  
6.023 * 2    ( numbers can be non-integers too)  
'R'   is a sigle character expression  
Another expression is "hello world"   (this is a sequence of characters)  
5 < 3 	 is a logic expression  
Same with 5 < 3 && 2 > 1   
~~~
Clearly we can put paranethesis to make it clear to us (and to others)  
~~~text
(5-3)-2 
(5-(3-2))
5-3-2
~~~

  * An arithmetic expression can be converted to a statement by using a ";"
  at the end.
  
  * Lets write a fully working program with this expression.

  * Exercise: Download and edit main.c

  * Lets summarize the learning:  
~~~text
| Expressions		| "Type" of the value in C
| --------------------- | ------------------------
| 5			| integer
| 5+3			| integer
| 6.023 * 2		| float    (real number)
| 'c'			| character
| "Hello world"		| character sequence (a pointer to the first character)
| sin(0.5)   		| (function call expression resulting in) a floating point value
~~~

## Notions of constants and operators in expressions

## Practicalities
  * Expressions are good but 
       we would like to see something when a program is run
  * We can use some help to print using puts, putchar or printf
  
## Notion of Stored Values and Variables
  * storing values is an important expression using the familiar '=' sign
  variables have address as well as value, but expressions only have value
  * Notions of memory
    * MODEL of storage and instructions. 
    * go back to objdump --disassemble
## Concept of definition of variables 
    * List of types in variable definitions
    * Notion of scope
    *  (also declaration) - how with extern declaration of a global
    *  We will learn more when we talk about functions

## Lets write a fully working proram with the storing idea
## Proacticality - reading and printing
   * expression and printing is good, but we may want to read something 
   into variables instead of fixing them in the program
   * we can use some help to read using scanf

## Exercise: 
  * The game of guessing 2(x+10)-2x = 20
  * Is it possible to get the address value ?





[comment]: # (--------- 03_binary_rep.md ---------)
# Binary Representatation
## Objective: Binary representations and arithmentic
## Binary Numbers in Computers
  * Important to know
  * The notion of binary representations
  * Why binary?
  * A game of coding Lets say A : "00" ; B : "01" ; C : "10" ; D : "11"
    * Can you decode **100001**
    * Can you encode **ABBA**
  * examples of binary representations 0 1 2 4 8 3 5 7 16 15
  * easier ways to talk binary - Octal and hexadecimal
  * How to store a number in binary? examples
   (Just to understand you can see od -cx) and also refer ascii table
  * One important concept is that a number like 108 needs only one bytes .
  However to store it as characters needs 3 bytes

  * Remember **all** stuff is in binary inside the computer. 
    So are non-numbers too.

  * With some proactice can you refer ASCII table and say what is stored for 
  "good" in hexadecimal ? What about a word like "hello"?
  wha about doing a od -cx on a file containing exactly that.

## Binary Operations
  * How does arithmetic work on binary numbers
  *Addition*

  * The problem with representation and signs
  *Subtraction* is addition of 2's complement

  * More operations in Binary world - Bit operations (AND OR NOT)

  * What is overflow ?
    Problems of integers and precision

  * The more important thing is that everything is represented in binary 
	for example characters and even non integer floats

## Exercise: can you use od -cx to see the contents of a file.
             In particular a character file?
	     Can you create a simple ASCII table (char vs hexadecimal)
	     convert these decimal numbers to binary and vice-versa
	     Why is hexadecimal so common ?





[comment]: # (--------- 04_confidence_fileio.md ---------)
# CONFIDENCE BUILDING EXERCISES AND A LITTLE MORE I/O

## Objective: 
  * Student is more confident with number representations
  * Student can understand ASCII order
  * Student understands address vs value
  * Student udnerstands logical and other operators too
  * Operator precedence
  * Student understands the notion of a file and file-IO
  * Understand that a function is simply another control flow change

## EXPRESSIONS
* Simple expressions and simple programs
  * Write a simple program with input and outputs
  * Revisit the notion of expressions and values
  * Can you check print\_next\_char.c

## More on Expressions, lvalue and rvalue
  * Recall the notion of expression values
  * an interesting expression value is address
  * the notion of left and right side of assignment operator
  * lvalue and rvalue
  * the notion of address and a pointer variable type to hold address
  the way to print address and to print what is in an address

## IO
  * learn more about printf and scanf .... in particular scanf
  * reading a writing from files - fprintf, fscanf
  * fopen, fscanf
  * See fileio.c and io.c

## Exercise
  * Remember to check the return value for error
  * fillin\_file.c
  * fillin\_simple.c
  * The notion of function calls as simply changing flow of control: funcs.c 
     

## More on IO
  * Write more interesting programs using scanf and printf
  * Revisit the guessing problem.
  * Other problems like check if one number is a factor of another.

## More about operators
  * ARITHMETIC OPERATORS in C
    * \+ - * / %
  * COMPARISION (RELATIONAL) OPERATORS in C
    * > >=  < <= == !=
  * LOGICAL OPERATORS in C
    * && || !
  * BITWISE OPERATORS in C
    * & | ^ ~


### Notion of operator precedence and associativity.
  * Consider 5 + 3 * 2
  * Consider 5 - 3 + 2
  * Refer pp 52 of K&R
  * One online reference is [here](https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/operator_precedence)

## End of class check:
  * Student should be able to write a program corresponding to a simple word 
      problem. Eg. Find the number that is 1/5th of 17 more than twice the number.
  * How does one write the output of the hello world program to a file?
  * Can you read an integer from a file and print twice its value to another file?
  * what does bitwise left shift to a number do?
  * Can you check if  a&b is giving you the right value through some examples?




[comment]: # (--------- 05_conditional_indenting.md ---------)
# Conditional Statements
## Objective
  * Why do we need conditionals
  * if and switch

## Attempt to write more useful programs:
  * The one that requires checking a condition
  * The one that requires repeatedly doing something
  * The one that requires us to store a large number of values of the same kind

##  Examples - go through by hand
  * read 2 numbers and print the maximum and the minumum
  * read a number and find its smallest factor > 1 
  * read a sequence of numbers and find the maximum
  * read a sequence of numbers and find the average
  * read a sequence of numbers and find the standard deviation
  * read a sequence of numbers and print them in reverse order
  * Find the mental constructs needed for each of these.
  * Note the need for comparision of some kind in each of these

##  IF () expression
  * Which problems can you solve
  * what about quadratic solving
  * Can you find max of  2 items
  *    what about 3 items ?
  *    what about 4 items ?
  *	Does the program grow really big?
  * EXERCISE fillin\_if.c  // answer is in find\_max.c ; 
   what if you wanted to do different things on different values of a variable.

## SWITCH() statement
  * read two integers x and y
  * read a third character
  * do the correspinding operation, see do\_op.c

* Why we should write well indented code. See examples.

* End of class check:
    * Student should be able to write a program to  swap two variables.
    * Student should be able to write a program to check that numbers are
      give in order, increasing or decreasing and make a statement.






[comment]: # (--------- 06_looping.md ---------)
# EXPRESSING REPEATED EXECUTION

## FOR
  * Looping through a sequence of values
    * FOR
    * findmax\_list\_f.c

## WHILE and its variations
  * LOOPING through a condition
    * WHILE see findmax\_list\_w.c
    * DO WHILE see findmax\_list\_d.c
  * What problems can you solve
    * PRACTICE fillin\_while.c    fillin\_findmax\_loop.c
    * max of 10 items?
    * sum of 10 items ?
    * sum of an unfixed number of items ?
    * the 3np1 problem ?
    * find if a given number is prime ?

## Understanding the FOR better

## Exercise
    * Student should be able to find the avarage of an arbitrary 
      number of integers input by the user.
    * See list\_avg\_f.c list\_avg\_w.c list\_avg\_d.c
    * Take a look at simple\_event\_count.c






[comment]: # (--------- 07_more_looping.md ---------)

# More Practice Exercises
  TBD




[comment]: # (--------- 08_arrays.md ---------)
# Arrays
## Objective
  * Arrays definition
  * Arrays usage via  indexing
  * Arrays end
  * Array usage without loops
  * Array usage with loops
  * Student should be able to write a small program to
         read and and write into an array
         find an element in the array

## Basic usage
  * Notion of indexing

## Usage in loops
  * arrays and for and while loops -  BE CAREFUL ABOUT THE END OF THE ARRAY
  * arrays and reading from files
  * writing arrays to files
  * finding max in an array
  * finding average of items in an array using for, while, do

## Exercise
  * reverse a list of numbers and print in reversed order
  * compute the standard deviation of a given se of numbers
  * Using multiple arrays  
    * student\_id[]  
    * marks\_sub1[]  
    * marks\_sub2[]  
    * marks\_sub3[]  
  * Find the student(s) with maximum marks in sub1.
    * Find the student(s) with maximum marks in all three subs taken together.
  * Using multiple arrays
    * list1[] has n integers
    * list2[] has m integers
    * make a new list list3[] with items from both list1[] and list2[]
    * what if you wanted to shuffle the elements of list1[] and list2 into list3
    * Assume list1 and list2 are sorted, can you merge them together into list3?

## End class check
  * Student should be able to write a small program to
    * read and and write into an array
    * find an element in the array
    * EXERCISE list\_avg\_array.c




[comment]: # (--------- 09_strings.md ---------)
# Strings and Arrays
  * Notion of strings and arrays
  * STRINGS of characters
  * Characters strings are just arrays
  * Notion of end of string marker
  * Can you now read a string and reverse it?
  * Can you now concatenate two strings into a third string?
  * Can you shuffle two strings?

## End of class check
  * Student should be able to walk through a string as an array and print
    its characters one by one and know when it ends.
  * Student should be able to capitalize a string of characters.




[comment]: # (--------- 10_strings_libraries.md ---------)
# Standard string library function in C
## Objective
  * String library usages
  * Notion of library

## Why library functions  
  *  The C library has many funcitons that make life easy
  * Functions from string.h
  * Functions from math.h
  * Functions from ctype.h ... many others
  * Use the string.h functions to do some of the stuff we did earlier
  * Can you convert a string to an int and vice versa using functions
    in ctype.h
  * Use the math.h functions to do interesting stuff like powers and trignometry
  * Remember to always check return value for errors. Read the man page!

## End of class check:
  * Student should be able to use string.h functions and strings in order 
    * to concatenate two strings.
    * to convert string to ascii and vice versa
    * to use the man page

## Exercises:
  * Check string\_library.c
  * try out fillin\_filio.c




[comment]: # (--------- 11_multid_arrays.md ---------)
# Multi-dimensional arrays
## Objectives
  * more on pointers and arrays
  * multi dimentional arrays

## Declaratios and usage
  * Arrays of pointers
  *   argv and argc
  * Multiple arrays in a program EXERCISE related\_arrays.c
  * Multidimentional arrays
  * More than two dimensions

## Execises
  * Matrix multiplication
  * matmul.c
  






[comment]: # (--------- 12_functions.md ---------)
# Functions

## What and Why

## Concepts
  * Declaration syntax
  * Functions with no parametrs
  * The notion of call and return
  * The concept of returning values
    * EXAMPLE funcs.c
  * Function arguments
    * EXAMPLE funcs\_params.c
  * Arguments are values
    *   swap revisited
    *   swap revisited with pointers
    *   Revisit scope 
## Declaration vs Definition
  * Prototype declarations
    *   Example: funcs\_scope.c
  * Examples with functions and pointers:
    * finding the minum in an array
    * magically array increment of all elements works very well
    * we can push any of our earlier examples into functions
## Recursion
  * Base case
  * recusion step
  * relationship to recursive definition
  * Recursion tree
  




[comment]: # (--------- 13_complexity_sorting_searching.md ---------)
# Algorithm Complexity Notions
  * Complexity of matrix multiplication as an example
## Simple search
  * Searching and complexity of searching
  * Simple linear search. try to create search.c
## Binary search
  * Searching - can we do better than linear search
    * Searching in a sorted array binary-search.c
    * EXERCISE Look at search.c
## Sorting
  * rearranging elemtnts    - Sorting
  * Elementary sorting algos
    * insertion sort
    * selection sort
    * bubble sort
## Exercise 
  * Look at basic\_sorts.c
## Computing the complexity
  * Computing their complexity
  * Big O notion - introductory level




[comment]: # (--------- 14_more_complexity.md ---------)
# Algorithm Complexity Calculation
  * Revisit the three sorting algorithms
  * Searching, linear and binary search
  * Analysis including that of recursion
    * Using a recursion tree for analysis




[comment]: # (--------- 15_structure.md ---------)
# Structure and Unions in C
  * Simple notions of structure type - declaration, access, via pointers?
  * Structure examples.
  * Typedef and its use in structures. Example is simple-timing.c
  * Arrays of structures.
  * Notions of declarations and typedef
  * Array of structure and multiple arrays comparision
  * Examples using structures, arrays, functions




[comment]: # (--------- 16_linked_list.md ---------)
# Linked List
  * Linked list as a useful higher level data structure
  * (So called recursive structure notion)
  * advantages over an array
  * Example implementation
  * Insert at the beginning
  * Insert at the end
  * print elements of the linked list




[comment]: # (--------- 17_mergesort.md ---------)
# Advanced sort - Mergesort
  * Algorithm - This is the more important part
    * Plan of the algorithm
    * Simple split
    * The recursion
    * How to merge two arrays - what is the base case (no further recursive calls needed)
    * Lets fill in the code
  * see msort.c




[comment]: # (--------- 18_quicksort.md ---------)
# Advanced Sorting - Quicksort

## The Algorithm 
  * Plan of the algorithm - This is the more important part
  * How to get a good pivot (middle most?, worst ?)
  * How to partition around the pivot  (a) with extra space vs (b) in-place

## Exercise
  * Start with fillin\_qsort.c (with extra space)  answer is in qsort\_extraspace.c

## Finishing the algorithm
  * Hope and probability
  * The recursion - what is the base case (no further recursive calls needed)
  * Lets fill in the code
  * See qsort.c





